Knowledge of natural things is not, indeed, the least noble jewel in the repository of evangelical preaching [used] to give examples and make comparisons, for we see the Redeemer as having used it. And the more familiar these examples and comparisons might be to the listeners—by using the words and the language most used among them—the more efficacious and advantageous they will be. For this purpose, with much expense and effort this volume has already become a treasury in which is written in the Mexican language the properties and the external and internal characteristics that could be discerned regarding the best-known and most utilized animals, birds and fish, trees and plants, flowers and fruits that exist in this entire land. In it, there is a great abundance of words, many very proper and very common expressions, and a most delightful subject matter. This work will also be very suitable for helping them understand the value of creatures, so that they do not attribute divinity to them; for whatever creature they saw as having some eminent characteristic, whether good or bad, they would call it teotl, which means “god.” So they would call the sun teotl because of its beauty, and likewise the sea because of its vastness and ferocity. And they would also give this name to many animals because of their frightening disposition and savagery. One can infer from this that this noun teotl is taken as both good and bad. And this is even more evident when it is found in a compound, such as in this noun: teopiltzintli, “very beautiful boy”; teopiltontli, “very naughty or bad boy.” Many other words are composed in the same way, and from their meaning, it can be conjectured that this word teotl means “a thing that is extreme in good or in bad.” And so the present volume can be considered or valued as a treasury of the expressions and words of this Mexican language and as a very rich repository of the things that exist in this land.

In the present volume, you have, my friendly reader, a forest with a great variety of mountains, hills, and cliffs, where you will find wild trees of every kind, ferocious beasts, and as many snakes as you may wish for. You have a garden populated by every fruitful tree and by all kinds of plants, where there are springs and rivers of various types. It is filled with birds, animals, and fish of every kind. You have a very delightful forest filled with every type of flower, both ones that blossom on trees, bushes, and shrubs, as well as ones that blossom in the grass. In it, there are birds of sweet songs with valuable feathers; there are also parks built in marvelous ways. You have a variety of roads and buildings; you also have fields and prairies where there are all sorts of edible things, where there are water holes and lagoons, where reeds, cattails, and rushes grow, as well as various types of aquatic and land animals; where there are mines for all sorts of metals and all sorts of precious stones and many other things beneficial to human life. [It is] where there are many kinds of soil, stones, water, and mountains. This work does not follow the order stated above but rather the one that follows: The first chapter deals with animals and contains seven paragraphs. The second deals with birds and contains ten paragraphs. The third chapter deals with water animals, such as fish and other animals that live in the water, and it contains five paragraphs. The fourth deals with the ferocious animals that live in the water, and it contains four paragraphs. The fifth deals with snakes and


